improve design document guildelines doc (#33131)
mantidproject/mantid: dev-docs/source/DesignDocumentGuides.rst

A good design document minimises unexpected complications by addressing
them before the code is written. A document will provide you, your
manager and your team with a common vocabulary for talking about the
project. Writing an effective design document can be tricky in itself, as
they often add unnecessary complexity if not done with care. These
guidelines are to help when and how to generate effective and simple design
documents.

When to write a design document
###############################

This section provides some guidelines on when to produce a design document.
Note that, it is not about when to do a design and when not.

> One should always do design work before coding, no matter the scope and the nature of the feature.

Author: I think this changes the meaning. I'll rather change to `perform design work before coding`.

> One should always perform design work before coding, no matter the scope and the nature of the feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One should always perform design work before coding, no matter the scope or the nature of the feature.
```

Reviewer: I still think this needs to be or rather than and.

These guidelines are to answer in which cases the design must be a *public*, *written* and *persistent* document, rather than a sketch on a white-board in a stand-up meeting that is wiped-out after it has been turned into code.

> Just as coding, design is an iterative and collaborative process.

Author: Here again I'm not sure, it is correct like this. Perhaps `Just like coding, design is ...` would be better.

> Having the document written allows for discussion and iterations with peers before the first line of code is written.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having a written document allows for discussion and iterations with peers before typing the first line of code.
```

Besides, the written document facilitates the pull request review process.
Having the design already approved, the reviewer will not need to do a design review with the code review, but will just need to make sure that the implementation matches the previously agreed design.
Finally, once written, the document can also serve as (or easily be turned into) a developer documentation for future reference.

> Not every feature requires a design document, as the benefit it adds must be gaged with the time and effort that goes into it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not every feature requires a design document. The benefit it adds must be gauged with the time and effort that goes into it.
```

Bug fixes, small extensions to the current functionalities, as well as concrete, single-class plugins, such as algorithms, do not need a document.

> In the contrary, if the feature is large-scope, brand-new, many-class, including abstractions, and/or touches or refactors the internals of the core framework, it will most likely need a document.

Reviewer: I also think this might benefit from being reformatted as a list. I also think it would draw attention to the examples.

Below are a couple of metrics that could help a developer decide whether or not the feature falls into that category.

- Number of classes and components.

>   If the number of classes is more than just a few, the document is relevant in order to describe the relations between them.

Reviewer: I feel that few is a subjective term here and can be interpreted very differently by different people. Can we express this more clearly?

- Fraction of abstract classes and interfaces in the design.

  Abstractions and APIs are hard to change, once in. So whenever the feature concerns creations of new abstraction layers and APIs, a wider discussion on the design is needed, hence the necessity of the document.

> - Fraction of files and components the feature will be touching.

Reviewer: Can we replaced fraction with number or amount?

>   Single file edits are less likely to require a document.

Reviewer: Can we expand on this? Is there a point where developers really must considering a written design document such as the number of files/components is greater than x or the percentage of the code base maybe? Perhaps we could also say that for cases inbetween a single file and the point at which you definitely need to do this that they need to be judged on a case by case basis? We would need to be clear what the criteria for judgement would be though.

Author: It is hard to find the appropriate thresholds. That's why these stay as guidelines, otherwise they will be just rules. I could elaborate on the extreme cases, such as one file, one class, or the other extreme. But in reality, most of the features will fall into the gray zone. Hence, the purpose is to combine all this metrics and use some overall judgement and/or advice from seniors to decide.

Reviewer: It's a really difficult one. I appreciate we are not trying to set rules here but we're potentially straying into the territory of guidance so vague it's not worth providing it. Perhaps a sentence about anything larger than a single file edit needs to be thought about and a reminder to use their judgement and/or seek advice from seniors. Then we're not setting rules but we're not being far too vague either.

- The layer the feature will be added to.

  If the feature is deep in the framework or workbench, it is more critical to have a document.

>   If the feature is just a plugin (algorithm, function, GUI, script) in the periphery, with low risk of side effects, design document is less important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If the feature is just a plugin (algorithm, function, GUI, script) in the periphery, with low risk of side effects, a design document is less important.
```

- Number of developers involved.

  If the feature is large enough that the implementation will be done in a distributed way, the document will ensure that the whole team has a common vision, discussed and agreed upfront.

- Number of users the feature will be facing.

  If the feature is generic, it will be facing a wider audience of users, hence a document and design review will make sure that the right feature is being built in the right way.

>   In the contrary, if the feature is specific to one instrument or technique at one facility, producing a document is less critical.

Reviewer: Can we say it may be less critical, yet it needs to be balanced with number of users? I'm assuming even if it was only one instrument or one technique if it has a high volume use we may need to consider a design document as it does affect a larger number of users.

Author: The point is that if it is a single instrument, no matter the number of end users using it, it will be a very small number compared to the overall workbench users. So it is not really the number of users of the instrument that counts (as compared to other instruments). What makes the difference is how generic the feature is. If it is a workflow for one instrument at one facility, it can't be compared with the generic tool as the workbench, even if that one isntrument has many users. So in my opinion, less critical or less important is really the best word here.

Reviewer: Thats fair enough - I withdraw my comment :)

> After all, these are just guidelines and a good intuition on when to write a document comes with experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are just guidelines and a good intuition on when to write a document comes with experience.
```

#. Once the comments are incorporated, in absence of outstanding conflicts, the gatekeepers will approve and merge the PR of the design, which gives a green light to start the implementation.

#. If there is still a debate between gatekeepers, the :ref:`TSC` will set up a dedicated meeting, where the author will be invited to present and defend the design, and all the conflicts must be settled via discussion or, eventually with a majority vote.

#. Once the implementation PR is opened, the design document must be referenced in the PR message.

Design document content
#######################

We want to avoid a prescriptive approach to design document layout.
Design documents are about communicating design ideas, not a box ticking
exercise, so developers are expected to use their own professional
judgement about what goes into them. We are not providing templates for
this reason. The following are suggestions for sections that one should normally have in a design
document:

Motivation
----------

-  Why does this design document exist?
-  What is the overview of the problem?
-  What use cases exist showing the present issue?
-  How does this solve the requirements?

> -  Note that, *this section should be readable also by non-developers*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  Note that, *this section should be readable to non-developers*.
```

first time around, so be prepared to make amendments, and don't take it
personally if corrections are required.

> Another thing to include is how can one verify the design, what are the use cases that could be used to prove the viability of the solution?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another thing to include is how can one verify the design? What are the use cases that could be used to prove the viability of the solution?
```
